Here's a marvellous convenient place for our rehersal.
And we will do it in action as we will do it before the duke.
Peter Quince.
What sayest thou, bully Bottom?
There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisbe
that will never please.
First, Pyramus must draw a sword to kill himself,
which the ladies cannot abide.
How answer you that?
By'r lakin, a parlous fear.
I believe we must leave the killing out, when all is done.
Not a whit. I have a device to make all well.
Write me a prologue.
Let the prologue seem to say
that we will do no harm with our swords
and that Pyramus is not killed indeed.
And for the more better assurance,
tell them that I, Pyramus, am not Pyramus,
but Bottom the weaver.
This will put them out of fear.
Well, we will have such a prologue,
and it shall be written in eight and six.
No, let it be two more.
Let it be written in eight and eight.
Will the ladies not be afeard of the lion?
I fear it, I promise you.
Masters, you ought to consider with yourselves.
To bring in-- God shield us--
a lion among ladies is a most dreadful thing,
for there is not a more fearful wild-fowl than your lion living.
And we ought to look to it.
Therefore, another prologue should tell it that he's not a lion.
Nay, you must name his name.
And half his face must be seen through the lion's neck.
And he himself must speak through
saying thus, or to the same defect,
"Ladies,"--or "Fair ladies"--
"I would wish you,"-- or "I would request you"--
or "I would--
Entreat you.
"I would entreat you not to fear,
"not to tremble my life for yours.
"If you think I come hither as a lion, "it were pity of my life.
"No, I am no such thing.
I am a man as other men are."
And there indeed let him name his name
and tell them plainly he is Snug the joiner.
Well, it shall be so.
But there is two hard things.
That is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber,
for Pyramus and Thisbe you know meet by moonlight.
Doth the moon shine that night we play our play?
A calendar, a calendar.
Look in the almanac.
Find out moonshine.
Yes, it doth shine that night.
Why, then, may you leave a casement
of the great chamber window, where we play, open,
and the moon may shine in at the casement.
Ay, or else one must come in
with a bush of thorns and a lantern,
and say he comes to disfigure, or to present,
the person of moonshine.
And there is another thing.
We must have a wall in the great chamber,
for Pyramus and Thisbe, says the story,
did talk through the chink of a wall.
You can never bring in a wall.
What say you, Bottom?
Some man or other must present wall,
and let him have some plaster or some loam
or some rough-cast about him to signify wall.
And let him hold his fingers thus,
and through that cranny shall Pyramus and Thisbe whisper.
If that may be, then all is well.
Come, sit down, every mother's son, and rehearse your parts.
Now, Pyramus, you begin.
When you have spoken your speech,
enter into that brake,
and so every one according to his cue.
What hempen home-spuns have we swaggering here
so near the cradle of the fairy queen?
What, a play toward.
I'll be an auditor, an actor too, perhaps,
if I see cause.
Speak, Pyramus.
Thisbe, stand forth.
Thisbe, the flowers of odious savours sweet--
Odious--Odorous!
Odorous savors sweet,
so hath thy breath, my dearest Thisbe dear.
But hark, a voice.
Stay thou but here awhile,
and by and by I will to thee appear.
A stranger Pyramus than e'er played here.
Must I speak now?
Ay, marry, must you, for you must understand
he goes but to see a noise that he heard
and is to come again.
Oh, most radiant Pyramus, most lily-white of hue,
of colour like the red rose on triumphant brier,
most brisky juvenal and eke most lovely Jew,
as true as truest horse that yet would never tire,
I'll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny's tomb.
"Ninus' tomb," man.
Why, you mustn't speak that yet, that you answer to Pyramus.
You speak all your part at once, cues and all.
Pyramus, enter.
Your cue is past.
It is, "never tire."
Oh, as true as truest horse, that yet would never tire.
If I were fair, fair Thisbe, I were only thine.
Oh, monstrous.
Oh, strange.
We are haunted.
Pray, masters.
Fly, masters!
Help!
I'll follow you. I'll lead you about, around,
through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier.
Sometime a horse I'll be, sometime a hound,
a hog, a headless bear, sometimes a fire
and neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn,
like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.
I see their knavery.
This is to make an ass of me, to fright me if they could.
But I will not stir from this place, do what they can.
I will walk up and down here, and I will sing,
that they shall hear I am not afraid.
The ousel cock so black of hue with orange-tawny bill.
The throstle with his note so true.
The wren with little quill--
The finch, the sparrow and the lark.
What angel wakes me from my flowery bed?
A plain-song cuckoo gray,
whose note full many a man doth mark,
and dares not answer nay.
For, indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a bird?
Who would give a bird the lie, though it cry "cuckoo" never so?
I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again.
Mine ear is much enamoured of thy note.
So is mine eye enthralled to thy shape.
And thy fair virtue's force
perforce doth move me on the first view
to say, to swear,
I love thee.
Methinks, mistress, you should have little reason for that.
And yet, to say the truth,
reason and love keep little company together nowadays.
The more the pity that some honest neighbours
will not make them friends.
Nay, I can gleek upon occasion.
Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.
Not so, neither,
but if I had wit enough to get out of this wood,
I have enough to serve mine own turn.
Out of this wood do not desire to go.
Thou shalt remain here, whether thou wilt or no.
I am a spirit of no common rate.
The summer still doth tend upon my state.
And I do love thee.
Therefore, go with me.
I'll give thee fairies to attend on thee,
and they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep
and sing whilst thou on pressed flowers dost sleep.
And I will purge thy mortal grossness
so that thou shalt like an airy spirit go.
Peaseblossom, Cobweb,
Moth, and Mustardseed.
- Ready. - And I.
- And I. - And I.
Where shall we go?
Be kind and courteous to this gentleman.
Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes.
Feed him with apricocks and dewberries,
with purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries.
The honey-bags steal from the humble-bee.
And for night-tapers, crop their waxen thighs
and light them at the fiery glow-worm's eyes,
to have my love to bed and to arise.
And pluck the wings from painted butterflies
to fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes.
Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.
- Hail. - Hail.
I cry your worship's mercy, heartily.
I beseech your worship's name.
Cobweb.
I shall desire you of more acquaintance,
good Master Cobweb.
If I cut my finger, I shall make bold with you.
Your name, honest gentleman?
Peaseblossom.
Good Master Peaseblossom,
I shall desire you of more acquaintance too.
Your name, I beseech you, sir?
Mustardseed.
Good Master Mustardseed,
Your kindred had made my eyes water ere now.
I desire your more acquaintance, good Master Mustardseed.
Come, wait upon him.
Lead him to my bower.
The moon methinks looks with a watery eye.
And when she weeps, weeps every little flower,
lamenting some enforced chastity.
Tie up my love's tongue.
Bring him silently.
How now, mad spirit!
What night-rule now about this haunted grove?
My mistress with a monster is in love.
This falls out better than I could devise.
Oh, why rebuke you him that loves you so?
Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.
Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse.
For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse.
If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep,
being o'er shoes in blood,
plunge in the deep and kill me too.
The sun was not so true unto the day as he to me.
Would he have stolen away from sleeping Hermia?
I'll believe as soon this whole earth may be bored
and that the moon may through the centre creep
and so displease her brother's noontide with the Antipodes.
It cannot be but thou hast murdered him.
So should a murderer look, so dead, so grim.
So should the murdered look and so should I,
pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty.
Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear
as yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere.
What's this to my Lysander?
Where is he?
Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?
I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.
Out, dog.
Out, cur.
Thou drivest me past the bounds of maiden's patience.
Hast thou slain him, then?
Henceforth be never numbered among men.
Oh, once tell true, tell true, even for my sake.
Durst thou have looked upon him being awake,
and hast thou killed him sleeping?
Oh, brave touch.
Could not a worm, an adder, do so much?
An adder did it,
for with doubler tongue than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.
You spend your passion on a misprised mood.
I am not guilty of Lysander's blood,
nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell.
I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.
If I could, what should I get therefore?
A privilege never to see me more.
And from thy hated presence part I so.
See me no more, whether he be dead or no.
ierce vein.
Here, therefore, for a while I will remain.
What hast thou done?
Thou hast mistaken quite and laid the love-juice
on some true-love's sight.
Of thy misprision must perforce ensue.
Some true love turned and not a false turned true.
Then fate o'er-rules, that, one man holding troth,
a million fail, confounding oath on oath.
About the wood go swifter than the wind
and Helena of Athens look thou find.
All fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer,
with sighs of love that costs the fresh blood dear.
By some illusion see thou bring her here.
I'll charm his eyes against she do appear.
I go. I go.
Look how I go, swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow.
Flower of this purple dye hit with Cupid's archery,
Sink in apple of his eye.
When his love he doth espy,
let her shine as gloriously as the Venus of the sky.
When thou wakest, if she be by,
beg of her for remedy.
Captain of our fairy band, Helena is here at hand,
and the youth, mistook by me, pleading for a lover's fee.
Shall we their fond pageant see?
Lord, what fools these mortals be.
Draw aside: the noise they make will cause Demetrius to awake.
Then will two at once woo one.
That must needs be sport alone.
And those things do best please me that befall preposterously.
Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?
Scorn and derision never come in tears.
Look, when I vow, I weep.
And vows so born, in their nativity,
all truth appears.
How can these things in me seem scorn to you,
Bearing the badge of faith to prove them true?
You do advance your cunning more and more.
These vows are Hermia's.
Will you give her o'er?
I had no judgment when to her I swore.
Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er.
Demetrius loves her and loves not you.
Helena, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine.
To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne?
Crystal is muddy.
Oh, how ripe in show thy lips, those kissing cherries,
tempting grow.
Oh, spite.
Pure congealed white, high Taurus snow,
Fanned with the eastern wind,
turns to a crow when thou holdest up thy hand.
I see you all are bent to set against me for your merriment.
You are unkind, Demetrius.
Be not so, for you love Hermia.
If you were civil, you would not do me this much injury.
Can you not hate me, as I know you do?
But you must join in souls to mock me too?
You love Hermia.
This you know I know.
And here, with all my good will, with all my heart,
In Hermia's love, I yield you up my part.
To vow and swear and superpraise my parts
when I am sure you hate me with your hearts.
You both are rivals and love Hermia.
In Hermia's love, I yield you up my part.
And yours of Helena to me bequeath,
And now both rivals to mock Helena.
Whom I do love and will do till my death.
A trim exploit,
a manly enterprise to conjure tears up
in a poor maid's eyes with your derision.
If e'er I loved her, all that love is gone.
Dark night, that from the eye his function takes,
the ear more quick of apprehension makes.
And now to Helen, is it home returned.
There to remain.
Helen, it is not so.
Never did mockers waste more idle breath.
Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found.
Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound.
But why unkindly didst thou leave me so?
Why should he stay, whom love doth press to go?
What love could press Lysander from my side?
Lysander's love, that would not let him bide,
fair Helena, who more engilds the night
Than all you fiery oes and eyes of light.
Why seekest thou me?
Could not this make thee know
the hate I bear thee made me leave thee so?
Lo, she is one of this confederacy
Now I perceive they have conjoined all three
to fashion this false sport in spite of me.
Injurious Hermia,
most ungrateful maid,
Have you conspired, have you with these contrived
to bait me with this foul derision?
Is all the counsel that we two have shared,
the sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent,
when we have chid the hasty-footed time for parting us.
Oh, is all forgot--
All school-days' friendship, childhood innocence?
We, Hermia, have like two artificial gods,
have with our needles created both one flower,
both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,
both warbling of one song, both in one key,
as if our hands, our sides,
voices and minds, had been incorporate.
So we grew together, like...
to a double cherry,
seeming parted, but yet an union in partition,
two lovely berries moulded on one stem,
so, with two seeming bodies, but one heart,
And will you rent our ancient love asunder,
to join with men in scorning your poor friend?
It is not friendly.
'Tis not maidenly.
Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it,
though I alone do feel the injury.
I am amazed at your passionate words.
I scorn you not.
It seems that you scorn me.
Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn,
to follow me and praise my eyes and face?
And made your other love, Demetrius,
who even but now did spurn me with his foot,
to call me goddess, nymph, divine and rare,
precious, celestial?
Wherefore speaks he this to her he hates?
And wherefore doth Lysander deny your love,
so rich within his soul,
and tender me, forsooth, affection,
but by your setting on by your consent?
What though I be not so in grace as you,
so hung upon with love, so fortunate,
but miserable most, to love unloved?
This you should pity rather than despise.
I understand not what you mean by this.
Ay, do, persever, counterfeit sad looks,
make mouths upon me when I turn my back,
wink each at other, hold the sweet jest up.
This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled.
If you had any pity, grace, or manners,
you would not make me such an argument.
But fare ye well.
No, stay, gentle Helena.
'Tis partly my own fault--
Hear my excuse.
Which death or absence soon shall remedy.
My life, my love, my soul, fair Helena.
Oh, excellent.
Sweet, do not scorn her so.
If she cannot entreat, I can compel.
Thou canst compel no more than she entreat.
Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers.
Helen, I love thee, by my life, I do.
I swear by that which I will lose for thee
to prove him false that says I love thee not.
I say I love thee more than he can do.
If thou say so, withdraw, and prove it too.
Quick, come!
Lysander, whereto tends all this?
Away, you Ethiope.
Hang off, thou cat, thou burr.
Vile thing, let loose, or I will shake thee from me like a serpent.
Thy love--Ha!
Out, tawny Tartar, out!
You loathed medicine, hated potion, hence!
Do you not jest?
Yes, sooth, and so do you.
You're a tame man.
Go.
Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.
I would I had your bond, for I perceive a weak bond holds you.
I'll not trust your word.
What, should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead?
No, although I hate her, I'll not harm her so.
What, can you do me greater harm than hate?
Hate me?
Wherefore?
Oh me, what news, my love.
Am not I Hermia?
Are not you Lysander?
I am as fair now as I was erewhile.
Since night you loved me, yet since night you left me.
Why, then you left me-- oh, the gods forbid--
in earnest, shall I say?
Ay, by my life, and never did desire to see thee more.
Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt.
Be certain, nothing truer: 'tis no jest that I do hate thee
and love Helena.
Oh, me.
You juggler.
You canker-blossom.
You thief of love!
What, have you come by night and stolen my love's heart from him?
What, will you tear impatient answers from my gentle tongue?
Fie, fie.
You counterfeit, you puppet, you.
Puppet?
Why so?
Ay, that way goes the game.
Now I perceive that she hath made compare between our statures.
She hath urged her height, and with her personage,
her tall personage, her height, forsooth,
she hath prevailed with him.
I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen,
let her not hurt me.
And are you grown so high in his esteem
because I am so--
dwarfish--
And so low?
I was never cursed.
I have no gift at all in shrewishness.
How low am I, thou painted maypole?
Speak.
How low am I?
I am a right maid for my cowardice.
I am not yet so low but that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.
Let her not strike me.
You perhaps may think because she is something
lower than myself that I can match her.
Lower! Hark, again.
Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me.
I evermore did love you, Hermia, did ever keep your counsels,
never wronged you.
Save that, in love unto Demetrius,
I told him of your stealth unto this wood.
AAHH!
He followed you.
For love, I followed him,
but he hath chid me hence and threatened me
to spurn me, strike me, nay, to kill me too.
And now, so you will let me quiet go.
To Athens will I bear my folly back and follow you no further.
Let me go.
You see how simple and how fond I am.
Why, get you gone.
Who is it that hinders you?
A foolish heart that I leave here behind.
What, with Lysander?
No, with Demetrius.
Ooh, when she's angry, she is keen and shrewd.
She was a vixen when she went to school,
and though she be but little, she is fierce.
"Little" again.
Nothing but "low" and "little."
Why will you suffer her to flout me thus?
Let me come to her.
Get you gone, you dwarf,
you minimus of hindering knot-grass made,
you bead, you acorn!
Let her alone.
Speak not of Helena.
Take not her part.
For, if thou dost intend never so little show of love to her,
thou shalt aby it.
Now she holds me not.
Now follow, if thou darest, to try whose right
of thine or mine, is most in Helena.
Follow?
Nay, I'll go with thee, cheek by jowl.
You, mistress, all this coil is long of you.
I will not trust you, I,
nor longer stay in your cursed company.
Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray.
My legs are longer though, to run away.
I am amazed and know not what to say.
This is thy negligence still thou mistakest
or else committest thy knaveries willfully.
Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook.
Did not you tell me I should know the man
by the Athenian garments he had on?
And so far blameless proves my enterprise
that I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes.
And so far, am I glad it so did sort
as this their jangling I esteem a sport.
Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight.
Hie therefore, Robin, overcast the night.
The starry welkin cover
thou anon with drooping fog as black as Acheron
and lead these testy rivals so astray
as one come not within another's way.
Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue.
Then stir Demetrius upwith bitter wrong.
And sometime rail thou like Demetrius.
And from each other look thou lead them thus,
till o'er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep
with leaden legs and batty wings doth creep,
Then crush this herb into Lysander's eye,
whose liquor hath this virtuous property
to take from thence all error with his might
and make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight.
When they next wake, all this derision
shall seem a dream and fruitless vision
and back to Athens shall the lovers wend,
with league whose date till death shall never end.
Whiles I in this affair do thee employ,
I'll to my queen and beg her Indian boy.
And then I will her charmed eye release
from monster's view,
and all things shall be peace.
My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,
for night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast,
and yonder shines Aurora's harbinger
at whose approach ghosts wandering here and there
troop home to churchyards, damned spirits
that in crossways and floods have burial,
already to their wormy beds are gone.
For fear lest day should look their shames upon,
they willfully themselves exile from light
and must for aye consort with black-browed night.
But we are spirits of another sort.
I with the morning's love have oft made sport.
And, like the forester, the groves may tread
even till the eastern gate, all fiery-red,
opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams,
turns into yellow gold his salt green streams.
But, notwithstanding, haste.
Make no delay.
We may effect this business yet ere day.
Up and down, up and down, I will lead them up and down.
I am feared in field and town.
Goblin, lead them up and down.
Here comes one.
Where art thou now, proud Demetrius?
Speak thou now.
Here, villain.
Drawn and ready.
Where art thou?
I will be with thee straight.
Follow me, then, to plainer ground.
Lysander, speak again.
Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?
Speak!
In some bush?
Where dost thou hide thy head?
Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,
telling the bushes that thou lookest for wars
and wilt not come?
Come, recreant; Come, thou child.
I'll whip thee with a rod.
He is defiled that draws a sword on thee.
Yea, art thou there?
Follow my voice.
We'll try no manhood here.
He goes before me and still dares me on.
When I come where he calls, then he is gone.
The villain is much lighter-heeled than I.
I followed fast, but faster he did fly,
that fallen am I in dark uneven way
and here will rest me.
Come, thou gentle day.
For if but once thou show me thy grey light,
I'll find Demetrius and revenge this spite.
Ho, ho, ho!
Coward, why comest thou not?
Abide me, if thou darest, for well I wot.
Thou runnest before me, shifting every place
and darest not stand nor look me in the face.
Where art thou now?
Come hither; I am here.
Nay, then, thou mockest me.
Thou shalt buy this dear if ever I thy face by daylight see:
Now go thy way.
Faintness constraineth me
to measure out my length on this cold bed.
Oh weary night,
Oh long and tedious night.
Abate thy hours.
Shine comforts from the east
that I may back to Athens by daylight
from these that my poor company detest.
And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye,
steal me awhile from mine own company.
Yet but three?
Come one more.
Two of both kinds makes up four.
Here she comes, curst and sad.
Cupid is a knavish lad thus to make poor females mad.
Never so weary, never so in woe.
Bedabbled with the dew and torn with briers,
I can no further crawl, no further go.
My legs can keep no pace with my desires.
Here will I rest me till the break of day.
Heavens shield Lysander if they mean a fray.
On the ground, sleep sound.
I'll apply to your eye, gentle lover, remedy.
When thou wakest, thou takest true delight
in the sight of thy former lady's eye.
And the country proverb known
that every man should take his own
in your waking shall be shown.
Jack shall have Jill.
Nought shall go ill.
The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well.
Jack shall have Jill.
Nought shall go ill.
The man shall have his mare again,
and all shall be well.